##Assembly vs Namespace

An assembly is collection of files compiled into a DLL (library) or EXE (executable program).

A namespace is a logical organization created by the programmer.  It can span across assemblies, and an assembly can contain multiple namespaces.

##Assembly

An assembly is an EXE or a DLL.
An assembly is the smallest unit of deployment.
An assembly is a collection of types and resources.

#Private Assembly

A private assebly can only be used by the application is was deployed with. It must be located in the application's home folder or one of its subdirectories.

A private assembly must be designed for side-by-side work with other versions of itself. It must be accompanied by an assembly manifest to make this possible.

#Shared Assembly

A shared assembly can be used by multiple applications. It will be loaded into the Global Assembly Cache. These assemblies are only loaded into memory if they are required.

A shared assembly must be strong-named, ie. have a unique id to prevent assembly conflicts.

#Dynamic Assembly

An assembly created by an application as it runs.

#Satellite Assembly

A satellite assembly is a DLL containing localization resources specific to a given culture.  They are only loaded if an application needs that culture's information (language or images).

These assemblies do not contain code (beyond what is auto-generated). They contain text, images, etc. Just resources.

These assemblies are not in the main assembly of an application, so that they can be changed without requiring a re-compilation of the entire application.

#Find Assembly in GAC

Windows hack to find the location of an assembly in the GAC:
1. Run > C:\\Windows\assembly\gac_msil
2. Find the assembly in the list, select it to see the location in the address bar

##Assembly Strong Name

This is a unique id made up of:
	the assembly name
	the version number
	optional cultural information
	a digital signature
	and a public key
	
The public key corresponds to the private key the used for the digital signature.

Assemblies with the same Strong Name should be identical.

##Assembly Manifest

The assembly manifest is an XML file containing the names and hashes of all files in the assembly, and a reference list of all external dependencies.
