##What is SOA?

#From misc

SOA stands for Service-Oriented Architecture.

It is the reliance on web services to send and receive data.  The services are loosely coupled, meaning any client on any platform can connect to any service as long as the essential contracts are met.

Clients can consume multiple services, and services can have multiple clients.

#From Plural Sight

The decomposition of a system into autonomous (or nearly autonomous) units of responsibility, and exposure of those units in a secure and controlled fasion.

Exposure of an API for your system.
The client has limited functionality access.
Clients access functionality by making service calls.

#From Sam Newman

Service-oriented architecture is a design approach where multiple services collaborate to provide some end set of capabilities. A service here typically means a completely separate operating system process. Communication between these services occurs via calls across a network rather than method calls within a process boundary.

(Summarized) The SOA movement got co-opted by vendors for profit and never explained how to achieve its architectural goals. The microservice movement (an extension of SOA) fills in the details of how to design, implement, and maintain such a system.

#SOA vs OOP

Comparison from the client side:
- OOP is when you use a library. You have access to all the individual objects. You need a lot of knowledge about how to use the objects together, what order to run operations in, etc.
- SOA abstracts all those details away, only exposing high-level operations that always leave the application in a valid state (i.e. they are stateless because state does not have to be maintained between calls).

Comparison from the application side:
- OOP is concerned with the lower-level design decisions.
- SOA is concerned with the higher-level design decisions.

#Strengths

- Reusability: two applications can call on the same service on the backend
- Maintenance: a service can be altered or replaced without client applications being aware of it